PROFESSIONALS AND CLIENTS: MODELS AND METAPHORS

the selections in chapter 3 began our approach to the question of the rights and responsibilities of professionals when they are functioning in their occupational roles. The present chapter carries that inquiry forward by asking how we are to understand the special moral relationship which obtains between professionals and those whose interests they are engaged to serve. Though simply stated, this question is enormously complex: For the relationships which are of philosophical interest to us here range from relationships like that between a self-employed physician and his or her clients, through that between a hospital-employed nurse and the hospital-as well as the nurse's clients-to relationships between scientific advisors and their employers (including the federal government) and to relationships between engineers and the corporations which employ them as well as the public whose interests they are supposed to protect by ensuring safe designs. 

Despite this great variety in employment relationships, there is a question implicitly raised by the readings in chapter 3 that pertains to all of them, namely, whether the engaged professional is to function solely as an agent in pursuit of his or her principal's interests, whether that principal is an individual person; or a local, state, or federal government; or some other corporate employer. In the context of legal practice, we have already seen Monroe Freedman defending what Michael Bayles in this chapter's reading calls the 'agency' model of the professional/principal relationship. Although Bayles limits his treatment of the professional/principal relationship to what he has called 'the consulting professions' (see sel. 1 in chap. 2), the agency model need not be limited in application to those professions. As a professional /principal model, it is also utilizable in thinking about professional responsibility in the employer/employee relationship even when the employers are as diverse in kind as those mentioned above. In chapter 10, for example, we shall see Milton Friedman arguing that the single moral responsibility of business managers is to maximize profits within the limits of law for the shareholders who have entrusted them with their funds. 

The present chapter, however, addresses the question of the professional/principal relationship by focusing on the relationship between professionals and clients in several of the service professions, namely, medicine, nursing, and higher education. The candidates which emerge in this chapter as models to be captured in these relationships are contract, covenant, advocate, and fiduciary. It may well be the case that these models are not mutually exclusive. And it may also be the case that no single model will be appropriate to serve as the standard across all the service professions (or the professions Bayles categorizes as the consulting professions). And it may also be the case that no single model fully captures all we want to capture in any one profession. Still, reflecting on the models and metaphors suggested in these readings can be useful in thinking through the rights and responsibilities of professionals toward their clients。

Central to our focus in this chapter is the question of power distribution in the professional client relationship. As Richard Wasserstrom's article in chapter 3 pointed out, the lawyer/client relationship seems to have a decidedly paternalistic component. This component has not been limited to relationships between attorneys and principals. Indeed, some would argue that paternalism has traditionally been one of the clearest characteristics of the health care professions and education (even at its highest levels), among others. But paternalism, as Bayles points out, strips clients of important rights to self-direction. The following articles by Robert Veatch and William May reject a paternalistic model for medicine. Veatch supports a contract model. which incorporates respect for patient autonomy. But May contends that the contract model fails to capture important features of the physician/patient relationship, and he attempts to improve on the contract model by suggesting that the relationship between physicians and their patients should be more richly understood as covenant. 

The article by Gerald Winslow addresses a metaphor which has recently been widely supported as providing the appropriate model for nursing, namely, the advocacy model. As Wins low points out, the advocacy model in nursing has its roots in law and is an interesting derivative of the agency model in legal practice. The advocacy model in nursing takes protection of the moral rights of patients to be central to nursing practice. suggesting that nurses are to assume the role of "moral watchdog" for patients in the health care system. Winslow traces the development of this metaphor in nursing and shows the obstacles nursing will need to overcome if nurses are to become effective patient advocates. 

My own article addresses the question of whether the relationship between professors and students in higher education is to be understood, in any general way, as a paternalistic one. I suggest that it is not and that we would do best to understand the general structure of the ordinary relationship between professors and their students as contractual in nature. An objection to my position might be raised along the lines suggested by May in his discussion of medicine. But it is not clear to me that contract, properly understood in certain contexts, needs to be as cool and legalistic as May's criticism of the contract model suggests. What the contract model in this chapter's readings preserves are the relevant aspects of the fiduciary model proposed by Bayles as well as the social sanctions which, as Veatch points out, institutionalize and stand behind the professional/client relationship in case there is a violation of the contract. At the same time, the model assumes that professionals will, in general, faithfully and conscientiously fulfill their obligations. The contract model also avoids the identification of the professional person with his or her professional role, which seems to be involved in May's account of the covenant model. 

Implicit in all the models of the professional/client relationship proposed in this chapter is a respect for professional autonomy. which is inadequately captured in the agency (or hired-gun) model of the professional/client relationship, as well as a respect for client autonomy, which is inadequately captured in the paternalistic model of the professional/client relationship. The articles by Veatch and Bayles as well as my own article begin a direct discussion of paternalism in the professions that will continue into the first part of chapter 5, where deceiving clients for their own good is the central issue. 


10. Models for Ethical Medicine in a Revolutionary Age Robert M. Veatch

most of the ethical problems in the practice of medicine come up in cases where the medical condition or desired procedure itself presents no moral problem. Most day-to-day patient contacts are just not cases which are ethically exotic. For the woman who spends five hours in the clinic waiting room with two screaming children waiting to be seen for the flu, the flu is not a special moral problem; her wait is. When medical students practice drawing bloods from clinic patients in the cardiac care unit-when teaching material is treated as material-the moral problem is not really related to the patient's heart in the way it might be in a more exotic heart transplant. Many more blood sample are drawn, however, than hearts transplanted. It is only by moving beyond the specific issues to more basic underlying ethical themes that the real ethical problems in medicine can be dealt with 

THE ENCINEERINC MODEL

One of the impacts of the biological revolution is to make the physician scientific. All too often he behaves like an applied scientist. The rhetoric of the scientific tradition in the modern world is that the scientist must be "pure." He must be factual, divorcing himself from all considerations of value. It has taken atomic bombs and Nazi medical research to let us see the foolishness and danger of such a stance. In the first place the scientist, and certainly the applied scientist, just cannot logically be value free. Choices must be made daily-in research design, in significance levels of statistical tests, and in perception of the "significant" observations from an infinite perceptual field, and each of these choices requires a frame of values on which it is based. Even more so in an applied science like medicine choices based upon what is "significant," what is "valuable," must be made constantly. The physician who thinks he can just present all the facts and let the patient make the choices is fooling himself even if it is morally sound and responsible to do this at all the critical points where decisive choices are to be made. Furthermore, even if the physician logically could eliminate all ethical and other value considerations from his decision making and even if he could in practice conform to the impossible value-free ideal, it would be morally outrageous for him to do so. It would make him an engineer, a plumber making repairs, connecting tubes and flushing out clogged systems, with no questions asked 

THE PRIESTLY MODEL 

In proper moral revulsion to the model which makes the physician into a plumber for whom his own ethical judgments are completely excluded, some move to the opposite extreme, making the physician a new priest. Establishment sociologist of medicine Robert N. Wilson describes the physician-patient relationship as religious. "The doc- tor's office or the hospital room, for example," he says, "have somewhat the aura of a sanctuary"; "…the patient must view his doctor in a manner far removed from the prosaic and the mundane." 

The priestly model leads to what I call the "As- a syndrome." The symptoms are verbal, but the disease is moral. The chief diagnostic sign is the phrase "speaking-as-a…" In counseling a pregnant woman who has taken Thalidomide, a physician says, "The odds are against a normal baby and "speaking-as-a-physician that is a risk you shouldn't take." One must ask what it is about medical training that lets this be said "as-a-physician" rather than as a friend or as a moral man or as a priest. The problem is one of generalization of expertise: transferring of expertise in the technical aspects of a subject to expertise in moral advice. 

The main ethical principle which summarizes this priestly tradition is "Benefit and do no harm to the patient." Now attacking the principle of doing no harm to the patient is a bit like attacking fatherhood. (Motherhood has not dominated the profession in the Western tradition.) But Father- hood has long been an alternative symbol for the priestly model, "Father" has traditionally been a personalistic metaphor for God and for the priest. Likewise, the classical medical sociology literature (the same literature using the religious images) always uses the parent-child image as an analogy for the physician-patient relationship. It is this paternalism in the realm of values which is represented in the moral slogan "Benefit and do no harm to the patient." It takes the locus of decision making away from the patient and places it in the hands of the professional. In doing so it destroys or at least minimizes the other moral themes essential to a more balanced ethical system. While a professional group may affirm this principle as adequate for a professional ethic, it is clear that society, more generally, has a much broader set of ethical norms. If the professional group is affirming one norm while society affirms another for the same circumstances, then the physician is placed in the uncomfortable position of having to decide whether his loyalty is to the norms of his professional group or to those of the broader society. What would this larger set of norms include? 

Producing Good and Not Harm

Outside of the narrowest Kantian tradition, no one excludes the moral duty of producing good and avoiding harm entirely. Let this be said from the start. Some separate producing good and avoiding evil into two different principles placing greater moral weight on the latter, but this is also true within the tradition of professional medical ethics. The real difference is that in a set of ethical norms used more universally in the broader society producing good and avoiding harm is set in a much broader context and becomes just one of a much larger set of moral obligations. 

Protecting individual Freedom 

Personal freedom is a fundamental value in society. It is essential to being truly human. Individual freedom for both physician and patient must be protected even if it looks like some harm is going to be done in the process. This is why legally competent patients are permitted by society to re- fuse blood transfusions or other types of medical care even when to the vast majority of us the price seems to be one of great harm. Authority about what constitutes harm and what constitutes good (as opposed to procedures required to obtain a particular predetermined good or harm) cannot be vested in any one particular group of individuals. To do so would be to make the error of generalizing expertise. 

Preserving individual Dignity 

Equality of moral significance of all persons means that each is given fundamental dignity. Individual freedom of choice and control over one's own life and body contributes to that dignity. We might say that this more universal, societal ethic of freedom and dignity is one which moves beyond B. F. Skinner. 

Many of the steps in the hospitalization, care, and maintenance of the patient, particularly seriously ill patients are currently an assault on that dignity. The emaciated, senile man connected to life by IV tubes, tracheotomy, and colostomy has difficulty retaining his sense of dignity. Small wonder that many prefer to return to their own homes to die. It is there on their own turf that they have a sense of power and dignity. 

Truth Telling and Promise Keeping 

As traditional as they sound, the ethical obligations of truth telling and promise keeping have retained their place in ethics because they are seen as essential to the quality of human relationships. It is disturbing to see these fundamental elements of human interaction compromised, minimized, and even eliminated supposedly in order to keep from harming the patient. This is a much broader problem than the issue of what to tell the terminal. carcinoma patient or the patient for whom there has been an unanticipated discovery of an XYY chromosome pattern when doing an amniocentesis for mongolism. It arises when the young boy getting his measles shot is told "Now this won't hurt a bit" and when a medical student is introduced on the hospital floor as "Doctor." And these all may be defended as ways of keeping from harming: the patient. It is clear that in each case, also especially if one takes into account the long-range. threat to trust and confidence, that in the long run these violations of truth telling and promise keeping may do more harm than good. Both the young b getting the shot and the medical student are being taught what to expect from the medical profession in the future. But even if that were not the case each is an assault on patient dignity and freedom and humanity. Such actions may be justifiable sometimes, but the case must be awfully strong 

Maintaining and Restoring justice 

Another way in which the ethical norms of the broader society move beyond concern for helping and not harming the patient is by insisting on a fair distribution of health services. What we have been calling the social revolution, as prefigurative as it may be, has heightened our concern for equality in the distribution of basic health services. If heal care is a right, then it is a right for all. It is not enough to produce individual cases of good heal or even the best aggregate health statistics. Even if the United States had the best health statistics ' the world (which it does not have), if this were attained at the expense of inferior health care f certain groups within the society it would be ethically unacceptable. 

At this point in history with our current record of discriminatory delivery of health services there is a special concern for restoring justice. Justice must also be compensatory. The health of those, who have been discriminated against must be maintained and restored as a special priority. 

THE COLLECIAL MODEL 

with the engineering model the physician becomes a plumber without any moral integrity. With the priestly model his moral authority so dominates the patient that the patient's freedom and dignity are extinguished. In the effort to develop a more proper balance which would permit the other fundamental values and obligations to be preserved, some have suggested that the physician and the patient should see themselves as colleagues pursuing the common goal of eliminating the illness and preserving the health of the patient. The physician is the patient's "pal." It is in the collegial model that the themes of trust and confidence play the most crucial role. When two individuals or groups are truly committed to common goals, then trust and confidence are justified and the collegial model is appropriate. It is a very pleasant, harmonious way to interact with one's fellow human beings. There is an equality of dignity and respect, an equality of value contributions, lacking in the earlier models. 
  
But social realism makes us ask the embarrassing question: Is there, in fact, any real basis for the assumption of mutual loyalty and goals, of common interest which would permit the unregulated community of colleagues model to apply to the physician-patient relationship? 

There is some proleptic sign of a community of real common interests in some elements of the radical health movement and free clinics. but for the most part we have to admit that ethnic, class, economic, and value differences make the assumption of common interest which is necessary for the collegial model to function … a mere pipedream. What is needed is a more provisional model which permits equality in the realm of moral significance between patient and physician without making the utopian assumption of collegiality. 

THE CONTRACTUAL MODEL 

The model of social relationship which fits these conditions is that of the contract or covenant. The notion of contract should not be loaded with legalistic implications but taken in its more symbolic form as in the traditional religious or marriage "contract" or "covenant." Here two individuals or groups are interacting in a way where there are obligations and expected benefits for both parties. The obligations and benefits are limited in scope, though, even if they are expressed in somewhat vague terms. The basic norms of freedom, dignity, truth telling, promise keeping, and justice are essential to a contractual relationship. The premise is trust and confidence even though it is recognized That there is no a full mutuality of interests. Social sanctions institutionalize and stand behind the relationship, in case there is a violation of the con- tract, but for the most part the assumption is that there will be a faithful fulfillment of the obligations.

Only in the contractual model can there be a true sharing of ethical authority and responsibility. This avoids the moral abdication on the part of the physician in the engineering model and the moral abdication on the part of the patient in the priestly model. It also avoids the uncontrolled and false sense of equality in the collegial model. With the contractual relationship there is a sharing in which the physician recognizes that the patient must maintain freedom of control over his own life and destiny when significant choices are to be made. Should the physician not be able to live with his conscience under those terms the contract is not made or is broken. This means that there will have to be relatively greater open discussion of the moral premises hiding in medical decisions before and as they are made. 

With the contractual model there is a sharing in which the patient has legitimate gounds for trusting that once the basic value framework for medical decision making is established on the basis of the patient's own values, the myriads of minute medical decisions which must be made day in and day out in the care of the patient will be made by the physician within that frame of reference. 

In the contractual model, then, there is a real sharing of decision making in a way that there is realistic assurance that both patient and physician will retain their moral integrity. In this contractual context patient control of decision making in the individual level is assured without the necessity of insisting that the patient participate in every trivial decision. On the social level community control of health care is made possible in the same way. The lay community is given and should be given the status of contractor. The locus of decision making is thus in the lay community, but the day-to-day medical decisions can, with trust and confidence, rest with the medical community. If trust and confidence are broken the contract is broken. 

Medical ethics in the midst of the biological and social revolutions is dealing with a great number of new and difficult ethical cases: in vitro fertilization, psychosurgery, happiness pills, brain death, and the military use of medical technology. But the real day-to-day ethical crises ma)' not be nearly so exotic. Whether the issue is in an exotic context or one which is nothing more complicated medically than a routine physical exam. the ethos of ethical responsibility established by the appropriate selection of a model for the moral relationship between the professional and the lay communities will be decisive. This is the real framework fa medical ethics in a revolutionary age.


11. Contract or Covenant? William F. May 

. . While criticizing the ideal of philanthropy, I have emphasized the elements of exchange, agreement, and reciprocity that mark the professional relationship. This leaves us with the question as to whether the element of the gratuitous should be suppressed altogether in professional ethics. Does the physician merely respond to the social investment in his training, the fees paid for his services, and the terms of an agreement drawn up between himself and his patients, or does some element of the gratuitous remain? 

To put this question another way: Is covenant simply another name for a contract in which two parties calculate their own best interests and agree upon some joint project in which both derive roughly equivalent benefits for goods contributed by each? If so, this essay would appear to move in the direction of those who would interpret the doctor- patient relationship as a legal agreement and who want, on the whole, to see medical ethics draw closer to medical law. 

The notion of the physician as contractor has certain obvious attractions. First, it represents a deliberate break with more authoritarian models (such as priest or parent) for interpreting the role. At the heart of a contract is informed consent rather than blind trust; a contractual understanding of the therapeutic relationship encourages full respect for the dignity of the patient, who has not, because of illness, forfeited his sovereignty as a human being. The notion of a contract includes an exchange of information on the basis of which an agreement is reached and a subsequent exchange of goods (money for services); it also allows for a specification of rights, duties, conditions, and qualifications limiting the agreement. The net effect is to establish some symmetry and mutuality in the relationship between the doctor and patient. 

Second, a contract provides for the legal enforcement of its terms--on both parties-and thus offers both parties some protection and recourse under the law for making the other accountable for the agreement. 

Finally, a contract does not rely on the pose of philanthropy, the condescension of charity. It presupposes that people are primarily governed by self-interest. When two people enter into a contract, they do so because each sees it to his own advantage. This is true not only of private contracts but also of that primordial social contract in and through which the state came into being. So argue the theorists of the eighteenth century. The state was not established by some heroic act of sacrifice on the part of the gods or men. Rather men entered into the social contract because each found it to hi; individual advantage. It is better to surrender some liberty and property to the state than to suffer the evils that would beset men apart from its protection. Subsequent enthusiasts about the social instrument of contracts have tended to measure human progress by the degree to which a society is based on contracts rather than status. In the ancient world, the Romans made the most striking advances in extending the areas in which contract rather than custom determined commerce between people. In the modern world, the bourgeoisie ex- tended the instrumentality of contracts farthest into the sphere of economics; the free churches, into the arena of religion. Some educationists today have extended the device into the classroom (as students are encouraged to contract units of work for levels of grade); more recently some women’s liberationists would extend it into marriage and still others would prefer to see it define the professional relationship. The movement, on the whole, has the intention of laicizing authority, legalizing relationships, activating self-interest, and encouraging collaboration.

In my judgment, some of these aims of the contractualists are desirable, but it would be unfortunate if professional ethics were reduced to a commercial contract. First, the notion of contract suppresses the element of gift in human relationships. Earlier I verged on denying the importance of this ingredient in professional relations, when l criticized the medical profession for its conceit of philanthropy, for its self-interpretation as the great giver. In fact, this earlier criticism was not an objection to the notion of gift but to the mora- pretension of a professional whenever it pretends to be the exclusiver giver. Factually, the professional is also the beneficiary of gifts received. It is unbecoming to adopt the pose of spontaneous generosity when the profession has received so much from the community and from patients, past and present. 

But the contractualist approach to professional behavior falls into the opposite error of minimal- ism. It reduces everything to tit for tat. Do no more for your patients than what the contract calls for. Perform specified services for certain fees and no more. The commercial contract is a fitting instrument in the purchase of an appliance, a house, or certain services that can be specified fully in advance of delivery. The existence of a legally enforceable agreement in professional transactions may also be useful to protect the patient or client against the physician or lawyer whose services fall below a minimal standard. But it would be wrong to reduce professional obligation to the specifics of a contract alone. 

Professional services in the so-called helping professions are directed to subjects whose needs are in the nature of the case rather unpredictable. The professional deals with the sickness, ills, crimes, Deeds, and tragedies of humankind. These needs cannot be exhaustively specified in advance for each patient or client. The professions therefore must be ready to cope with the contingent, the unexpected. Calls upon services may be required that exceed those anticipated in a contract or for which compensation may be available in a given case. These services moreover are more likely to be effective in achieving the desired therapeutic result if they are delivered in the context of a fiduciary relationship that the patient or client can really trust. 

Contract and covenant, materially considered, reem like first cousins; they both include an exchange and an agreement between parties. But, in spirit, contract and covenant are quite different. Contracts are external; covenants are internal to the parties involved. Contracts are signed to be expediently discharged. Covenants have a gratuitous, growing edge to them that spring from ontological change and are directed to the upbuilding of relationships. 
There is a donative element in the upbuilding of covenant-whether it is the covenant of marriage, friendship, or professional relationship. Tit for tat characterizes a commercial transaction. but it does not exhaustively define the vitality of that relation- ship in which one must serve and draw upon the deeper reserves of another. 

This donative element is important not only in the doctor's care of the patient but in other aspects of health care. In a fascinating study of The Gift Relationship, the late economist, Richard M. Tit- muss, compares the British system of obtaining blood by donations with the American partial reliance on the commercial purchase and sale of blood, without the exploitation of the indigent, which the American system has condoned and which our courts have encouraged when they re- fused to exempt non-profit blood banks from the antitrust laws. By court definition, blood exchange becomes a commercial transaction in the United States. Titmuss expanded his theme from human blood to social policy by offering a sober criticism of the increased commercialism of American medicine and society at large. Recent court decisions have tended to shift more and more of what had previously been considered as services into the category of commodity transactions with negative consequences he believes for the health of health delivery systems.2 Hans Jonas has had to reckon with the importance of voluntary sacrifice to the social order in a somewhat comparable essay on "Human Experimentation." * Others have done so on the subject of organ transplants. 

The kind of minimalism that a contractualist understanding of the professional relationship encourages produces a professional too grudging, too calculating, too lacking in spontaneity, too quickly exhausted to go the second mile with his patients along the road of their distress. 

Contract medicine encourages not only minimalism, it also provokes a peculiar kind of maximalism, the name for which is "defensive medicine. " Especially under the pressure of malpractice suits, doctors are tempted to order too many ex- aminations and procedures for self-protection. Paradoxically, contractualism simultaneously tempts the doctor to do too little and too much for the patient-too little in that one extends oneself only to the limits of what is specified in the contract, yet, at the same time, too much in that one orders procedures useful in protecting oneself as the con- tractor even though not fully indicated by the condition of the patient. The link between these apparently contradictory strategies of too little and too much is the emphasis in contractual decisions on self-interest. 

Three concluding objections to contractualism can be stated summarily. Parties to a contract are better able to protect their self-interest to the degree that they are informed about the goods bought and sold. Insofar as contract medicine encourages in- creased knowledge on the part of the patient, well and good. Nevertheless the physician's knowledge so exceeds that of his patient that the patient's knowledgeability alone is not a satisfactory constraint on the physician's behavior. One must at least, in part, depend upon some internal fiduciary checks which the professional (and his guild) accept. 

Another self-regulating mechanism in the traditional contractual relationship is the consumer's freedom to shop and choose among various vendors of services. Certainly this freedom of choice needs to be expanded for the patient by an increase in the number of physicians and paramedical personnel. However, the crisis circumstances under which medical services are often needed and delivered does not always provide the consumer with the kind of leisure or calm required for discretionary judgment. Thus normal marketplace controls can- not be relied upon fully to protect the consumer in dealings with the physician. 

For a final reason, medical ethics should not be reduced to the contractual relationship alone. Normally conceived, ethics establishes certain rights and duties that transcend the particulars of a given agreement. The justice of any specific contract may then be measured by these standards. If, however, such rights and duties adhere only to the contract, then a patient might legitimately be persuaded to waive his rights. The contract would solely deter- mine what is required and permissible. An ethical principle should not be waivable (except to give way to a higher ethical principle). Professional ethics should not be so defined as to permit a physician to persuade a patient to waive rights that transcend the particulars of their agreement. 

The Donative mode seems to provide for a more satisfactory analysis than the philanthropic or the contractual, but it shares their flaws. Analysis based on Donative elements suggests that the professional fulfills his contract, lives up to his specified technical code, and then, gratuitously, throws in some- thing extra to sweeten the pot. All of these tools of analysis allow the analyst to evade the uncomfortable and demanding ontological implications of … profession as transformation. . . A profession of a mystery, in theological terms changes one from damned to saved; in professional terms, from a man who studies medicine. to a man who at all times embodies healing. . . A professional eats to heal, drives to heal. reads to heal, comforts to heal, rebukes to heal, and rests to heal. The transformation is radical, and total. The Hippocratic Oath, under this ontological aspect, can be summaried: aut medicus aut nihil: from this moment. I am a healer or I am (literally) nothing. He takes his identity from that which he professes, and that which he professes, to which he is covenanted, whose code he will embody, transcends him and transcends his colleagues. 

Two characteristics of covenantal ethics haw been developed in the course of contrasting it wit the ideal of philanthropy and the legal instrument of contracts. As opposed to the ideal of philanthropy that pretends to wholly gratuitous altruism covenantal ethics places the service of the professional within the full context of goods, gifts, and services received; thus covenantal ethics is responsive. As opposed to the instrument of contract that presupposes agreement reached on the basis of self-interest, covenantal ethics may require one to be available to the covenant partner above and beyond the measure of self-interest; thus covenantal ethics has an element of the gratuitous in it. 

Covenant ethics shies back from the idealist assumption that professional action is and ought to be wholly gratuitous and from the contractualist assumption that it be carefully governed by quotidian self-interest in every exchange.

A transcendent reference may also be important in laying out not only the proper context in which human service takes place but also the specific standards by which it is measured. Earlier we noted some dangers in reducing rights and duties to the terms of a particular contract. We observed the need for a transcendent norm by which contracts are measured (and limited). By the same token. rights and duties cannot be wholly derived from the particulars of a given covenant. What limits ought to be placed on the demands of an excessively dependent patient? At what point does the keeping of one covenant do an injustice to obligations entailed in others'] These are questions that warn against a covenantal ethics that sentimentalizes any and all involvements, without reference to a transcendent by which they are both justified and measured. 

FURTHER REFLECTIONS ON COVENANT 

So far we have discussed those features of a covenant that affect the doctor's conduct toward his patient. The concept of convenant has further con- sequences for the patient's understanding of his role as patient, for the accountability of health institutions, for the placement of institutional priorities within other national commitments, and, finally, for such collateral problems as truth telling. 

Every model for the doctor-patient relationship establishes not only a certain image of the doctor, but also a specific concept of the patient. The image of the doctor as priest or parent encourages de- pendency in the patient. The image of the doctor as skillful technician encourages the patient to think of himself as passive host to a disease. The doctor and his technical procedures are the only serious agent in the relationship. The image of the doctor as covenanter or contractor bids the patient to become a more active participant both in the prevention and the healing of disease. He must bring a will-to-live and a will-to-health to the partnership. 

Differing views of disease are involved in these differing patterns of relationship to the doctor. Disease today is usually interpreted by the layman as an extraordinary state, discrete and episodic, disjunctive from the ordinary condition of health. Illness is a special time when the doctor is in charge and the layman renounces authority over his life. This view, while psychologically understandable, ignores the buildup, during apparent periods of health, of those pathological conditions that invite the dramatic breakdown when the doctor "takes over."

The cardiovascular accident is a case in point. Horacio Fabrega has urged an interpretation of disease and health that respects more fully the processive rather than the episodic character of both disease and health. This interpretation, I assume, would encourage the doctor to monitor more continuously health and disease than ordinarily occurs today, to share with the patient more fully the information so obtained, and to engage the layperson in a more active collaboration with the doctor in health maintenance. 

The concept of covenant has two further advantages for defining the professional relationship not enjoyed by models such as parent, friend, or technician. First, covenant is not so restrictively personal a term as parent or friend. It reminds the professional community that it is not good enough for the individual doctor to be a good friend or parent to the patient, it is important also that whole institutions-the hospital, the clinic, the professional group-keep covenant with those who seek their assistance and sanctuary. Thus the concept permits a certain broadening of accountability be- yond personal agency. 

At the same time, however, the notion of the covenant also permits one to set professional responsibility for this one human good (health) within social limits. The professional covenant concerning health should be situated within a larger set of covenant obligations that both the doctor and patient have to other institutions and priorities within the society at large. The traditional models for the doctor-patient relationship (parent, friend) tend to establish an exclusivity of relationship that obscures these larger responsibilities. At a time when health needs command $120 billion out of the national budget, one must think about the place that the obligation to the limited human good of health has among a whole range of social and personal goods for which men are compacted together as a society. 
 
12. From Loyalty to Advocacy: A New Metaphor for Nursing* 
 Gerald R.'Winslow 

But the paradigm is changing. For over a decade, professional nursing has been engaged in profound revision of its ethic. The evidence is abundant: revised codes of ethics, new legal precedents, a flood of books and articles on nursing ethics, and, what may be more significant than any other attestation, a shift in the central metaphors by which nursing structures its own self-perception. 

The metaphors associated with nursing are numerous. Two examples that have received considerable attention recently are the nurse as traditional- mother substitute and the nurse as professional contractor. As substitute mother, the nurse cares for sick children (patients) and follows the orders of the traditional father (the physician). As professional contractor, the nurse negotiates a plan for the care of clients (patients) and consults with other contractors (other health care professionals). 

Such metaphors are not mere niceties of language. Rather, they interact with the more explicit features of nursing ethics, such as stated rules and principles, in ways that tend to be either mutually supportive or productive of change. The power of metaphors is due in part to their capacity to focus attention on some aspects of reality while concealing others.2 For example, thinking of the nurse as a parent may highlight certain functions, such as nurture, protection, and domination, while hiding the patient's responsibility for decisions about his or her own care. The metaphor has the ability to create a set of expectations and make some forms of behavior seem more "natural" than others. Thus, if both nurse and patient begin to use the metaphor of nurse as contractor and its associated forms of expression, such as "negotiations," they may come to expect actions in keeping with a "businesslike" relationship. 

This article examines the developing changes in nursing ethics by considering two basic metaphors and the norms and virtues consonant with them. The first is nursing as military effort in the battle against disease, a metaphor that permeates many of the early discussions of nursing ethics. It is associated with virtues such as loyalty and norms such as obedience to those of "higher rank" and the maintenance of confidence in authority figures. The second metaphor is nursing as advocacy of patient rights, an essentially legal metaphor that has pervaded much of the literature on nursing ethics within the past decade. The metaphor of advocacy is associated with virtues such as courage and norms such as the defense of the patient against infringements of his or her rights. I did not select these two metaphors for analysis randomly, but, in pan. because they have played a prominent role in the formation of ethics within nursing's own literature. \lore than most others, these metaphors have been espoused by the leaders of nursing, and hart had obvious effects on nursing education and practice. Metaphors such as the nurse as surrogate parent, nun, domestic servant, or "handmaiden d the physician" have often been discussed. But these discussions have been almost entirely intended to reject such metaphors and not to uphold them as representative of nursing ideals. Indeed such metaphors have been used most often to serve as foils for images considered more adequate. Or the other hand, the military metaphor, with is language of loyalty and obedience, and the legal metaphor, with its language of advocacy and rights. have served as basic models of ideal nursing practice as proposed in nursing literature. 

THE MILITARY METAPHOR 

It would be surprising if professional nursing had not early adopted the metaphor of military service Modern nursing is generally acknowledged to have begun with the work of Florence Nightingale, su-perintendent of nurses in British military hospitals during the Crimean War in the 1850s.3 Upon ha return to England, she continued her work with the military and was instrumental in founding the British Army Medical School. Whatever else Nightingale was, she most certainly was a practitioner and proponent of strict military discipline. And though some have criticized Nightingale's work. the idealization of the "Lady with the Lamp" continues, with rare exceptions, in professional nursing to this day. As two nurses very recently declared: "We think of ourselves as Florence Nightingale-tough, canny, powerful, autonomous. and heroic.

Not only was modern nursing born in a military setting, it also emerged at a time when medicine was appropriating the military metaphor: medicine as war. It has now become difficult to imagine a more pervasive metaphor in contemporary medicine (unless, perhaps, it is medicine as economic enterprise). Disease is the enemy, which threatens to invade the body and overwhelm its defenses. Medicine combats disease with batteries of tests and arsenals of drugs. And young staff physicians are still called house officers. But what about nurses? 

Perhaps even more than medicine, nursing explicitly choose the military metaphor. It was used to engender a sense of purpose and to explain the training and discipline of the nurse. In the fledgling American Journal of Nursing, Charlotte Perry, an early leader, described the education required to produce the "nursing character. " Upon entering training, wrote Perry, the student "soon learns the military aspect of life-that it is a life of toil and discipline. ." Such discipline, the author asserted, is part of the "ethics of nursing," and it should be evidenced in the "look, voice, speech, walk, and touch" of the trained nurse. The nurse's "whole being bristles with the effect of the military raining she has undergone and the sacrifices she has been called upon to make. A professional manner is the result."

The goal of the military discipline was to pro- duce trained nurses with many of the qualities of good soldiers. The military imagery was neither subtle nor unusual, as a passage from an early book on nursing ethics illustrates: 
[An] excellent help to self-devotion is the love a nurse has for the stem strife of her constant battle with sickness.
. "The stem joy which warriors feel, in foemen worthy of their steel," should inspirit the valiant heart of the nurse as it does the heart of the brave soldier who bears long night watches, weary marches, dangerous battles, for the love of the conflict and the keen hope of victory. The soldier in a just war is upheld by this keen joy of battle. So will the nurse be spurred on to devotion by the love of conflict with disease.

The moral force of the metaphor is obvious. Nurses should be prepared for the hardships of night duty, personal danger, weary walking, and so forth. And there can be little doubt that the military metaphor supported a number of nursing behaviors. A minor example is the uniform. Early discussions of nursing ethics almost always included sections on propriety regarding dress. The uniforms of different schools had characteristic differences, reminiscent of the differences signifying various military units. And as nurses progressed up the ranks, stripes were added to their caps and insignia pins to their uniforms. The uniform was always to be worn while "on duty" but never while "off duty." And ordinary clothing was even referred to as "civilian dress 

Some traits are more important to good soldiers than the proper wearing of uniforms. More central, for example, is suitable respect for those of higher rank. Such respect is evidenced both in obedience and in various symbolic gestures of deference. Commenting on nursing ethics, Perry urged her fellow nurses to have proper respect for rank: 
Carrying out the military idea, there are ranks in authority. . . . "Please" and "Thank you" are phrases which may be exchanged between those of equal rank. The military command is couched in no uncertain terms. Clear, explicit directions are given, and are received with unquestioning obedience. 

Later, Perry added that there are "necessary barriers" between those of different ranks and "familiarity" should not be allowed to dismantle these barriers. The ideal of military obedience was applied often to the nurse's work with physicians. Physicians were the commanding officers. 

In a published lecture to nurses, one physician did not hesitate to use the military metaphor in explaining why there must be discipline in the hospital "just as in the regiment, [where] we have the captains, the lieutenants, and the sergeants. Obedience to one's superiors is an essential duty of all. " The author acknowledged that some of the rules are bound to "appear captious and unfair." Nevertheless, they must be obeyed. And such obedience should be not in a spirit of fear but rather in a spirit of "loyalty." 

Loyalty was one of the key virtues of the ideal nurse. In the words of the Nightingale pledge: "With loyalty will I endeavor to aid the physician in his work nearly every early discussion of nursing ethics includes a major section on loyalty, and the link between loyalty and the military metaphor was strong. For example, the physician just quoted reminded nurses of their obligation: "As in the hospital loyalty to her superior officers is the duty of the nurse, so in private nursing she must be loyal to the medical man who is in attendance on her patient." This sentiment is echoed in Charlotte Aikens's 1916 book on nursing ethics, a standard text for over twenty years: 
Loyalty to the physician is one of the duties demanded of every nurse, not solely because the physician is her superior officer, but chiefly because the confidence of the patient in his physician is one of the important elements in the management of his illness, and nothing should be said or done that would weaken his faith or create doubts as to the character or ability or methods of the physician 

What, then, did it mean for the "trained nurse" to be loyal? It meant, to be sure, faithful and self- sacrificial care of patients. But most of the discussions of loyalty were occupied more with another concern: the protection of confidence in the health care effort. Loyalty meant refusal to criticize the nurse's hospital or training school, fellow nurses, and most importantly, the physician under whom the nurse worked. 

Ideally, all these loyalties should harmonize. And nurses were often reminded that being loyal to the physician by preserving the patient's confidence was the same as being loyal to the patient. As one doctor put it: "Loyalty to the physician means faithfulness to the patient, even if the treatment is not always in line with what [the nurse] has been taught in the training school. . . Loyalty to the physician and faithfulness to the patient do not form a twofold proposition, but a single one." The reasoning was supposed to be obvious: The patient's recovery could be aided powerfully by trust in the doctor and the prescribed regimen. Worry over the doctor's competence was likely to worsen the patient's condition not only because of the wasted energy but also because of the lost power of suggestion and the patient's failure to comply with the treatment. The author of a text on nursing ethics summed up the idea: 
Confidence and skepticism are both contagious, and we know very well how important it often is for a patient's cure that he should have the attitude of faith and confidence in his physician. . . . it is unkind indeed to destroy a confidence which is so beneficent and comforting

The moral power of this reasoning should not be overlooked. Nurses accepted as their solemn obligation assisting in the patient's recovery. And nurses were taught repeatedly that the "faith that people have in a physician is as much a healing liement as is any medicinal treatment." Thus, even if the physician blundered, the patient's confidence should usually be maintained at all costs. To quote an early nursing text: 
If a mistake has been made in treating a patient, the patient is not the person who should know it if it can be kept from him, because the anxiety and lack of confidence that he would naturally feel might be injurious to him and retard his recovery.

But what if the nurse finally concluded that the confidence in the physician simply was not merited? It is one of the myths of a later generation that nurses of the past never questioned loyalty to the physician. In speeches, journals, and books, leading nurses complained that loyalty to the physician often was not deserved and even more often was not returned in kind.re And the difficult moral dilemmas faced by nurses were usually discussed in terms of conflicts of loyalties. For example, in an earlier editorial titled "Where Does Loyalty End?" the author claimed that many letters from nurses asked essentially the same questions: "Where does the nurse's loyalty to the doctor end? And is she required to be untruthful or to practice deceit in order to uphold the reputation of the physician at her own expense or that of the patient?"

The published letters revealed the kinds of cases troubling nurses. One told how a physician inserted a catheter too far into the patient's bladder-a mistake that, according to the nurse, required surgery to correct. The nurse reported that she was blamed in order to protect the doctor's reputation. Another nurse told how a physician failed to re- move a surgical sponge, causing the patient great suffering and neardeath. When the problem became apparent, the nurse was unable to keep the truth from the family. Later, the doctor chastised the nurse for failure to conceal the truth. The writer claimed that "nurses are taught that they must stand by the doctor whether he is right or wrong." But, she concluded, if this means lying to the patient in order "to defend the doctor then I don't care for the profession 

Such letters (and many similar discussions in early nursing literature) indicate that conflicts of loyalties tended to focus on two main issues: truth telling and physicians' competency. Obviously, these two were often linked. Nurses felt obliged to protect doctors even if the care seemed deficient and the truth suffered. But in many cases the truth was concealed because physicians did not want their patients to know their diagnoses. In her text on ethics, Aikens complained: "From the beginning of her career [the nurse] is impressed with the idea that . . it is an unpardonable sin to lie to a doctor about a patient but perfectly pardonable. and frequently very desirable, to lie to a patient about his own condition." So, although lying was often roundly condemned, clearly it was often the "order" of the day. Dissonance was the inevitable result. Nurses were pleased, as Lena Dietz put it, to "enjoy a confidence such as is placed in no other women in the world. . . The fact that they are nurses is accepted as an unquestionable guarantee of honesty." But, at times, loyalty to the "superior officers" left the guarantee more than a little tattered. 

In all likelihood loyal protection of the physician often was motivated, in no small measure, by the nurse's desire for self-protection. In the early years of nursing, the goal of most graduate nurses was to leave the hospital and become "private duty nurses."2a The names of those available for this work were obtained from the local "registry" ( kept variously by hospitals, nurses' associations, or medical associations) or simply by word of mouth. Technically, such nurses were hired directly by the patient. But in reality the attending physician was highly influential in the selection of the private nurse and, if need be, in the nurse's dismissal. Understandably, this arrangement led at times to conflicting interests and loyalties. One doctor grumbled: "Paid by the patient, or someone close to him, and not by the physician, [the nurse] sometimes seems to think that it is safest to 'stand in' with the patient, and actually obey him, rather than the physician."2s The patient paid the wages of the nurse, but the doctor was supposed to be in charge. The financial implications of this arrangement were not lost on nurses. Aikens wrote: "Not infrequently, a nurse is torn between her desire to be loyal to the patient's interests, and not disloyal to the doctor, who has it in his power to turn calls in her direction. and influence other doctors to do the same, or the reverse."

Troubled at times by conflicting loyalties and worried about employment, nurses advocated a number of strategies for coping with some doctors' apparent ineptitude. Of these strategies, four stand out. 

First, the nurse could faithfully obey all orders and simply assume that the doctor knew best. Isabel Robb, in the first American book on nursing ethics, wrote: "Apart from the fact that [the nurse] may be quite wrong in her opinions, her sole duty is to obey orders, and so long as she does this, she is not to be held responsible for untoward results."27 On this, the prevailing view, the nurse was sup- posed to be absolved from guilt so long as she followed orders. The doctrine of respondent superior generally did offer nurses legal protection. But moral protection is not always so easily se- cured, hence the additional strategies.

Second, the nurse could gently question the doctor's orders. Sara Parsons suggested to her nursing colleagues that when the nurse "becomes sufficiently experienced to detect a mistake, she will, of course, call [the doctor's] attention to it by asking if her understanding of the order is correct."28 This approach of nurses making what amounts to recommendations in the form of questions is apparently long-lived. Recent work indicates that it is still an expected part of the "doctor nurse game. " 

A third maneuver was consultation with some other authority figure. In the hospital, the nursing supervisor was the most likely candidate. But the private duty nurse had no such recourse. This difficulty led one author to propose that the nurse call the family's "religious advisor" in a confidential attempt to engineer a change of physicians.
Finally, the nurse could withdraw from the case, or refuse the physician's patients from the beginning. If the doctor was intolerably deficient, Robb counseled, the nurse could "always find some means of refusing to take charge of the nursing of his patients. . ." Robb added, however, "Once having put herself under [the doctor], let her remain loyal and carry out his orders to the letter."32 And in his lecture to nurses, a physician put the same point bluntly: "Better to-be an honest deserter than a traitor in the camp.""

Better than deserter or traitor, however, was the nurse as loyal soldier. Then the world changed' Or at least the metaphors did

THE LECAL METAPHOR

It would be foolish to set a date to the changing of nursing's self-image' The process has been gradual, the way tortuous. As was noted earlier, nurses’. criticism of the "one-sided loyalty" expected of them dates back nearly to the beginning of the profession. And by 1932, Annie Warburton Goodrich, an acknowledged leader, could speak of nursing's "militarism, that splendid drilling in subordination of self to the machine" as a feature that the profession was attempting to "modify, if not abolish. " 

Even if the abolition has come slowly, some major events can be identified. For example, a significant blow to nursing's ethic of military loyalty occurred in an unlikely place in 1929, ln Manila, a newly graduated nurse, Lorenza Somera, was found guilty of manslaughter, sentenced to a year in prison, and fined one thousand pesos be- cause she followed a physician's order. The physician had mistakenly called for the preparation of cocaine injections (he meant procaine) for a tonsillectomy patient. Witnesses agreed that the physician ordered the cocaine, that Somera verified that order, and that the physician administered the injections. But the physician was acquitted and Somera found guilty because she failed to question the orders. The Supreme Court upheld the lower court's decision.

Nurses around the world (and especially in the United States, because the Philippine Islands were under U.S. jurisdiction) were at first stunned and then incensed. A successful protest campaign was organized, and Somera was pardoned before serving a day of her sentence. But the whole affair left an enduring impression on nurses. The doctrine of respondeat superior turned out to be thin security. Never again could nurses be taught simply to follow doctors' orders. Even now, over fifty years later, nursing texts still refer to Somera as proof of nurses' independent accountability.

But, despite Somera and later similar cases, the tradition of loyalty to the physician retained con- siderable power. This strength was illustrated by the first codes of nursing ethics. Nurses had been calling for a code of ethics before the turn of the century. But not until 1926 was the first "suggested code" for nurses proposed. By present standards this proposed code must be judged- remarkably enlightened. it speaks of broad principles and, with regard to nurses; relationship to physicians, it says that "neither profession can secure complete results without the other." When the proposed code discusses loyalty, it says that "loyalty to the motive which inspires nursing should make the nurse fearless to bring to light any serious violation of the ideals herein expressed." Perhaps not surprisingly, the code failed to gain acceptance’s The next attempt came in 1940. This proposal was much more similar to what later became the accepted tenets." Obligations to the physicians were central' For example the code adopted by the Association (ANA) called for nurses to verify and carry out the physicians orders, sustain confidence in the physician, and report incompetency or unethical conduct "only to the proper authority." A similar code, approved by the Intonational Council of Nurses in 1953, spelled out the nurse's obligation to follow the physician's orders "loyally" and to maintain confidence in the physician.

In the 1960s and 1970s the image of the loyal nurse began to be significantly revised. The forces for change in health care delivery during the past two decades are too numerous and complex to analyze here. In his social history of medicine, Paul Starr describes the "stunning loss of confidence" sustained by medicine during the 1970s. The formerly unquestioned mandate of the "sovereign profession" was challenged with increased frequency. Consumerism was strengthening. And the ever-higher costs of medical care along with the perceived arrogance of many in the medical profession irritated large numbers of consumers. Moreover, medicine was viewed increasingly as a large, impersonal institution, a privileged and protected castle constantly resisting needed modifications. For nursing, a profession populated almost entirely by women, the growth of feminism also proved a highly important development. These forces, and many others, achieved sharp focus in the patients' rights movement which, in Stan's words, "went beyond traditional demands for more medical care and challenged the distribution of power and expertise." Few in the health care system seemed more eager for the challenge to succeed than nurses. It was hardly surprising, therefore, that leaders of the patients' rights movement turned to nurses in the search for "patient advocates." For example, George Annas, an attorney and author of The Rights of Hospital Patients, called for nurses to accept the new role of patient advocacy . it is worthy of note that Annas prefaced his appeal to nurses by explicitly attacking the military metaphor. Nurses who accepted such traditional images would be poorly equipped to be patient advocates. At times, orders would have to be challenged. But, Annas argued, properly re- trained nurses had the potential to play a "key role" in patient advocacy.

